---
title: "UN Forces In Somalia"
date: "2020-02-23T22:40:32.169Z"
author: "Jimena Hernantes"
description: "Currently in the world there are many humanitarian conflicts in which an organization like the UN are taking part in. Their nature and development are to be analyzed in other future articles. Many questions arise from these conflicts, the participation of said international organization, and how is it understood in the context of International Humanitarian Law, which is another interesting topic to understand conflicts and international crises. "
---

Currently in the world there are many humanitarian conflicts in which an organization like the UN are taking part in. Their nature and development are to be analyzed in other future articles.
Many questions arise from these conflicts, the participation of said international organization, and how is it understood in the context of International Humanitarian Law, which is another interesting topic to understand conflicts and international crises.
These are some of those commonly asked questions:

1.  Are the demands made by the resolutions on the protection of humanitarian convoys in line with the pertinent rules of International Humanitarian Law? Does International Humanitarian Law provide a right to humanitarian aid? If so, for whom? Only for civilians? Also in non-international armed conflicts?

In the article 23 of the Geneva Convention IV it is stated that each high Contracting Party shall allow free passage of all consignments of medical and hospital stores, essential foodstuffs, clothing and tonics. It is an obligation for said Contracting Parties, therefore the demands made by this resolution are in line with what is stated in the Geneva Convention. In the Article 59 it is stated as well that the contracting parties shall guarantee the protection of these consignments.
In addition, the additional Protocol I broadens those obligations to the contracting parties to cover “rapid and unimpeded passage of all relief consignments, equipment and personnel”. The obligation to allow and facilitate access of humanitarian relief to civilians in need is also supported by official statements and reported practice. The United Nations has on many occasions called for respect for the rule. The UN Security Council, for example, has called for unimpeded access for humanitarian relief efforts in Iraq and in all areas affected by the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan as well.
Both Additional Protocols I and II require the consent of the parties concerned for relief actions to take place even though most of the practice collected does not mention this requirement. Nevertheless it is obvious that a humanitarian organization cannot operate without the consent of the party concerned. However, such consent must not be refused on arbitrary grounds because if it is established that a civilian population is threatened with starvation and a humanitarian organization which provides relief on an impartial and non-discriminatory basis is able to aid in this situation, a party is obliged to give consent. In a resolution adopted in 2000 on protection of civilians in armed conflicts, the UN Security Council called upon “all parties concerned, including neighboring states, to cooperate in providing access for humanitarian personnel.
The obligation to allow the free passage of relief supplies is also set forth in military manuals which are applicable in non-international armed conflicts. The obligation to allow the free passage of relief supplies is also supported by many official statements and other practice relating to non-international armed conflicts. It is also relevant that under the Statute of the International Criminal Court, extermination, defined as including “the intentional infliction of conditions of life the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population”, constitutes a crime against humanity when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack. (ICC Statute, Article 7).

B) Does the UN’s recent practice, as part of its peacekeeping mandate, of sending troops to ensure effective provision of humanitarian relief reaffirm the right to humanitarian assistance? (Security Council Resolutions 794, para. 10, and 814, para. 14)
In these suggested paragraphs it can be seen that “all necessary means to establish as soon as possible a secure environment for humanitarian relief operations in Somalia”, which means that legally, sending troops is completely lawful.

C) Do attacks on personnel providing relief supplies constitute a violation of IHL? Are they grave breaches of IHL? Even attacks on armed UN forces providing relief? (GC IV, Arts 3, 4, 23, 27, 59,142 and 147, P I, Arts 50, 51(2), 69, 70, 81 and 85; P II, Arts 4(2)(a), 13(2) and 18).
Yes, these attacks on personnel are a complete violation of IHL because as it was stated in Article 59 of the Geneva Convention IV, all contracting parties shall permit the free passage of the consignments undertaken by humanitarian organizations, and guarantee their protection.
Grave breaches are described by anything that involves any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protected by the present Convention: willful killing, torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, willfully causing suffering or serious injury to body or health, unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement of a protected person, compelling a protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power, or willfully depriving a protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed in the present Convention, taking of hostages and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly. Therefore, the attacks towards the protected personnel is a grave breaches, because people have been killed and injured and harmed by violence here.

2. A) If the UN forces are authorized to use force to establish and maintain a secure environment in Somalia for providing humanitarian aid, does the UN become a party to the conflict and hence internationalize a non-international armed conflict? Or can the UN forces be considered for purposes of the applicability of IHL as armed forces of the troop-contributing States (which are Parties to the Geneva Conventions), and can any hostilities be considered as an armed conflict between those States and the party responsible for the opposing forces? Does Somalia thereby become an occupied territory to which Convention IV applies? Which provisions of Convention IV applicable to occupied territories can appropriately apply to such a UN presence which contradicts its own basic aims?

The United Nations would not be part of the conflict, it is there to make sure that international humanitarian law and human rights are respected by both or whichever is the number of parties in the conflict. These parties need to respect what it has been approved and what they have agreed on, and the United Nations is acting as a watcher, balancer and helper for those civilians in need that must be protected under any conflict.
The troops cannot be considered as part of the contributing states because the United Nations is very clear on that point, any combatants and soldiers acting under their command and on missions created and directed by the United Nations exercising their mandate are under the sole authority of the organization. And therefore, Somalia will not be an occupied state by the United Nations.

B) The Security Council authorizes the UN forces “to use all necessary means” (Resolution 794, para. 10). Are such measures limited by IHL? If so, by the IHL of international or no international conflicts? Is the UN a Party to the Conventions and Protocols? Can the UN conceivably be a party to an international armed conflict in the sense of Art. 2 common to the Conventions? What do you think of the argument that IHL cannot formally apply to these or any other UN operations, because they are not armed conflicts between equal partners but law enforcement actions by the international community authorized by the Security Council representing international legality, and their aim is not to make war but to enforce peace?

Those measures would be limited by international law and in non-international armed conflicts. No, only countries were parties to the Geneva Conventions and the Protocols. Yes, the United Nations can be part of an international armed conflict in the sense of said article because it was created with the aim to maintain international order, peace and security through international cooperation.
I personally think that it could be correct and incorrect depending on the perspective. However, from my point of view International Humanitarian Law, which is the law that regulates the conduct of war, seeks to limit the effects of armed conflict by protecting persons who are not participating in the hostilities, which means that it could apply to UN operations when these are acting in the sense of an international armed conflict, because even though they are not a direct party, they are involved in the situation and the personnel sent is involved directly.

C) Can you imagine why the UN and its Member States do not want to recognize the de jure applicability of IHL to UN operations or to establish precisely which principles and spirit of IHL they recognize as being applicable to UN operations?

It might be to protect and excuse their actions, because UN operations are there to stop conflicts and maintain the peace in the world. Also there is no definition of peace-keeping forces in the instruments of IHL, therefore they might appear as combatants instead. It should be highlighted as well that even though the soldiers inside the UN forces are bound to the commitments made by their states of origin, the UN has insisted on the fact that during the exercise of their mandate they are under the sole authority of the organization.

D) Do attacks on the Pakistani UNOSOM contingent constitute a violation of IHL? Are they grave breaches of IHL? Are the members of that contingent civilians or combatants? Are they “taking no active part in hostilities”? Even if they are creating a secure environment for humanitarian relief to be brought to Somalia? Yes, they would be a violation of International Humanitarian Law because they are not direct parties of the conflict. Yes, because not being part of it means that they are under the protection and killing them or harming them is completely banned and would be considered as a violation.
They are not taking part in the hostilities because they are not attacking, they are there to maintain the peace and help the parties involved to stop the conflict and then maintain their peace.

3. Do the resolutions enforce jus ad bellum or jus in bello, or both? Is such mixing of the two detrimental to respect for IHL?
   Both, because jus ad bellum refers to the conditions under which the states may resort to the use of armed force, whilst jus in bello regulated the conduct of parties engaged in an armed conflict, seeking to minimize the ssuffering in armed conflicts by protecting and assisting victims.
   It could be considered detrimental because only the second one, jus in bello, is synonymous with International Humanitarian Law.
